Documentation/wmi/devices/msi-wmi-platform.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

===================================================
MSI WMI Platform Features driver (msi-wmi-platform)
===================================================

Introduction
============

Many MSI notebooks support various features like reading fan sensors. This features are controlled
by the embedded controller, with the ACPI firmware exposing a standard ACPI WMI interface on top
of the embedded controller interface.

WMI interface description
=========================

The WMI interface description can be decoded from the embedded binary MOF (bmof)
data using the `bmfdec <https://github.com/pali/bmfdec>`_ utility:

::

  [WMI, Locale("MS\0x409"),
   Description("This class contains the definition of the package used in other classes"),
   guid("{ABBC0F60-8EA1-11d1-00A0-C90629100000}")]
  class Package {
    [WmiDataId(1), read, write, Description("16 bytes of data")] uint8 Bytes[16];
  };

  [WMI, Locale("MS\0x409"),
   Description("This class contains the definition of the package used in other classes"),
   guid("{ABBC0F63-8EA1-11d1-00A0-C90629100000}")]
  class Package_32 {
    [WmiDataId(1), read, write, Description("32 bytes of data")] uint8 Bytes[32];
  };

  [WMI, Dynamic, Provider("WmiProv"), Locale("MS\0x409"),
   Description("Class used to operate methods on a package"),
   guid("{ABBC0F6E-8EA1-11d1-00A0-C90629100000}")]
  class MSI_ACPI {
    [key, read] string InstanceName;
    [read] boolean Active;

    [WmiMethodId(1), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void GetPackage([out, id(0)] Package Data);

    [WmiMethodId(2), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void SetPackage([in, id(0)] Package Data);

    [WmiMethodId(3), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_EC([out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(4), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_EC([in, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(5), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_BIOS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(6), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_BIOS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(7), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_SMBUS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(8), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_SMBUS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(9), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_MasterBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(10), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_MasterBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(11), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_SlaveBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(12), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_SlaveBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(13), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Temperature([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(14), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Temperature([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(15), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Thermal([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(16), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Thermal([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(17), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Fan([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(18), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Fan([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(19), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Device([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(20), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Device([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(21), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Power([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(22), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Power([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(23), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Debug([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(24), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Debug([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(25), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_AP([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(26), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_AP([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(27), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Data([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(28), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Data([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(29), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_WMI([out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);
  };

Due to a peculiarity in how Windows handles the ``CreateByteField()`` ACPI operator (errors only
happen when a invalid byte field is ultimately accessed), all methods require a 32 byte input
buffer, even if the Binary MOF says otherwise.

The input buffer contains a single byte to select the subfeature to be accessed and 31 bytes of
input data, the meaning of which depends on the subfeature being accessed.

The output buffer contains a single byte which signals success or failure (``0x00`` on failure)
and 31 bytes of output data, the meaning if which depends on the subfeature being accessed.

WMI method Get_EC()
-------------------

Returns embedded controller information, the selected subfeature does not matter. The output
data contains a flag byte and a 28 byte controller firmware version string.

The first 4 bits of the flag byte contain the minor version of the embedded controller interface,
with the next 2 bits containing the major version of the embedded controller interface.

The 7th bit signals if the embedded controller page changed (exact meaning is unknown), and the
last bit signals if the platform is a Tigerlake platform.

The MSI software seems to only use this interface when the last bit is set.

WMI method Get_Fan()
--------------------

Fan speed sensors can be accessed by selecting subfeature ``0x00``. The output data contains
up to four 16-bit fan speed readings in big-endian format. Most machines do not support all
four fan speed sensors, so the remaining reading are hardcoded to ``0x0000``.

The fan RPM readings can be calculated with the following formula:

        RPM = 480000 / <fan speed reading>

If the fan speed reading is zero, then the fan RPM is zero too.

WMI method Get_WMI()
--------------------

Returns the version of the ACPI WMI interface, the selected subfeature does not matter.
The output data contains two bytes, the first one contains the major version and the last one
contains the minor revision of the ACPI WMI interface.

The MSI software seems to only use this interface when the major version is greater than two.

Reverse-Engineering the MSI WMI Platform interface
==================================================

.. warning:: Randomly poking the embedded controller interface can potentially cause damage
             to the machine and other unwanted side effects, please be careful.

The underlying embedded controller interface is used by the ``msi-ec`` driver, and it seems
that many methods just copy a part of the embedded controller memory into the output buffer.

This means that the remaining WMI methods can be reverse-engineered by looking which part of
the embedded controller memory is accessed by the ACPI AML code. The driver also supports a
debugfs interface for directly executing WMI methods. Additionally, any safety checks regarding
unsupported hardware can be disabled by loading the module with ``force=true``.

More information about the MSI embedded controller interface can be found at the
`msi-ec project <https://github.com/BeardOverflow/msi-ec>`_.

Special thanks go to github user `glpnk` for showing how to decode the fan speed readings.

Commit message:

platform/x86: msi-wmi-platform: Workaround a ACPI firmware bug (git-fixes).
suse-commit: 24a14e434e7c95ef9e370dcdc1f2e25961bab728

Documentation/wmi/devices/msi-wmi-platform.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

===================================================
MSI WMI Platform Features driver (msi-wmi-platform)
===================================================

Introduction
============

Many MSI notebooks support various features like reading fan sensors. This features are controlled
by the embedded controller, with the ACPI firmware exposing a standard ACPI WMI interface on top
of the embedded controller interface.

WMI interface description
=========================

The WMI interface description can be decoded from the embedded binary MOF (bmof)
data using the `bmfdec <https://github.com/pali/bmfdec>`_ utility:

::

  [WMI, Locale("MS\0x409"),
   Description("This class contains the definition of the package used in other classes"),
   guid("{ABBC0F60-8EA1-11d1-00A0-C90629100000}")]
  class Package {
    [WmiDataId(1), read, write, Description("16 bytes of data")] uint8 Bytes[16];
  };

  [WMI, Locale("MS\0x409"),
   Description("This class contains the definition of the package used in other classes"),
   guid("{ABBC0F63-8EA1-11d1-00A0-C90629100000}")]
  class Package_32 {
    [WmiDataId(1), read, write, Description("32 bytes of data")] uint8 Bytes[32];
  };

  [WMI, Dynamic, Provider("WmiProv"), Locale("MS\0x409"),
   Description("Class used to operate methods on a package"),
   guid("{ABBC0F6E-8EA1-11d1-00A0-C90629100000}")]
  class MSI_ACPI {
    [key, read] string InstanceName;
    [read] boolean Active;

    [WmiMethodId(1), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void GetPackage([out, id(0)] Package Data);

    [WmiMethodId(2), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void SetPackage([in, id(0)] Package Data);

    [WmiMethodId(3), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_EC([out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(4), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_EC([in, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(5), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_BIOS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(6), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_BIOS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(7), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_SMBUS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(8), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_SMBUS([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(9), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_MasterBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(10), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_MasterBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(11), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_SlaveBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(12), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_SlaveBattery([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(13), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Temperature([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(14), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Temperature([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(15), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Thermal([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(16), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Thermal([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(17), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Fan([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(18), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Fan([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(19), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Device([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(20), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Device([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(21), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Power([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(22), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Power([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(23), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Debug([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(24), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Debug([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(25), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_AP([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(26), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_AP([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(27), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_Data([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(28), Implemented, read, write, Description("Set the contents of a package")]
    void Set_Data([in, out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);

    [WmiMethodId(29), Implemented, read, write, Description("Return the contents of a package")]
    void Get_WMI([out, id(0)] Package_32 Data);
  };

Due to a peculiarity in how Windows handles the ``CreateByteField()`` ACPI operator (errors only
happen when a invalid byte field is ultimately accessed), all methods require a 32 byte input
buffer, even if the Binary MOF says otherwise.

The input buffer contains a single byte to select the subfeature to be accessed and 31 bytes of
input data, the meaning of which depends on the subfeature being accessed.

The output buffer contains a single byte which signals success or failure (``0x00`` on failure)
and 31 bytes of output data, the meaning if which depends on the subfeature being accessed.

.. note::
   The ACPI control method responsible for handling the WMI method calls is not thread-safe.
   This is a firmware bug that needs to be handled inside the driver itself.

WMI method Get_EC()
-------------------

Returns embedded controller information, the selected subfeature does not matter. The output
data contains a flag byte and a 28 byte controller firmware version string.

The first 4 bits of the flag byte contain the minor version of the embedded controller interface,
with the next 2 bits containing the major version of the embedded controller interface.

The 7th bit signals if the embedded controller page changed (exact meaning is unknown), and the
last bit signals if the platform is a Tigerlake platform.

The MSI software seems to only use this interface when the last bit is set.

WMI method Get_Fan()
--------------------

Fan speed sensors can be accessed by selecting subfeature ``0x00``. The output data contains
up to four 16-bit fan speed readings in big-endian format. Most machines do not support all
four fan speed sensors, so the remaining reading are hardcoded to ``0x0000``.

The fan RPM readings can be calculated with the following formula:

        RPM = 480000 / <fan speed reading>

If the fan speed reading is zero, then the fan RPM is zero too.

WMI method Get_WMI()
--------------------

Returns the version of the ACPI WMI interface, the selected subfeature does not matter.
The output data contains two bytes, the first one contains the major version and the last one
contains the minor revision of the ACPI WMI interface.

The MSI software seems to only use this interface when the major version is greater than two.

Reverse-Engineering the MSI WMI Platform interface
==================================================

.. warning:: Randomly poking the embedded controller interface can potentially cause damage
             to the machine and other unwanted side effects, please be careful.

The underlying embedded controller interface is used by the ``msi-ec`` driver, and it seems
that many methods just copy a part of the embedded controller memory into the output buffer.

This means that the remaining WMI methods can be reverse-engineered by looking which part of
the embedded controller memory is accessed by the ACPI AML code. The driver also supports a
debugfs interface for directly executing WMI methods. Additionally, any safety checks regarding
unsupported hardware can be disabled by loading the module with ``force=true``.

More information about the MSI embedded controller interface can be found at the
`msi-ec project <https://github.com/BeardOverflow/msi-ec>`_.

Special thanks go to github user `glpnk` for showing how to decode the fan speed readings.
