Kernel driver adt7411
=====================

Supported chips:

  * Analog Devices ADT7411

    Prefix: 'adt7411'

    Addresses scanned: 0x48, 0x4a, 0x4b

    Datasheet: Publicly available at the Analog Devices website

Author: Wolfram Sang (based on adt7470 by Darrick J. Wong)

Description
-----------

This driver implements support for the Analog Devices ADT7411 chip. There may
be other chips that implement this interface.

The ADT7411 can use an I2C/SMBus compatible 2-wire interface or an
SPI-compatible 4-wire interface. It provides a 10-bit analog to digital
converter which measures 1 temperature, vdd and 8 input voltages. It has an
internal temperature sensor, but an external one can also be connected (one
loses 2 inputs then). There are high- and low-limit registers for all inputs.

Check the datasheet for details.

sysfs-Interface
---------------

================    =================================
in0_input           vdd voltage input
in0_min             vdd low limit
in0_max             vdd high limit
in0_alarm           vdd alarm
in[1-8]_input       analog 1-8 input
in[1-8]_min         analog input low limit
in[1-8]_max         analog input high limit
in[1-8]_alarm       analog input alarm
temp1_input         internal temperature input
temp1_min           internal temperature low limit
temp1_max           internal temperature high limit
temp1_min_alarm     internal temperature low alarm
temp1_max_alarm     internal temperature high alarm
================    =================================

If the external temperature sensor is enabled, the following attributes are
also available:

================ ================================================
temp2_input      external temperature input
temp2_min        external temperature low limit
temp2_max        external temperature high limit
temp2_min_alarm  external temperature low alarm
temp2_max_alarm  external temperature high alarm
temp2_fault      external temperature sensor fault
================ ================================================

If the external temperature sensor is enabled, analog inputs in1 and in2 are
not available.

Besides standard interfaces, this driver adds (0 = off, 1 = on):

  ============== =======================================================
  adc_ref_vdd	 Use vdd as reference instead of 2.25 V
  fast_sampling	 Sample at 22.5 kHz instead of 1.4 kHz, but drop filters
  no_average	 Turn off averaging over 16 samples
  ============== =======================================================

Notes
-----

SPI is not supported yet.
