.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later

Kernel driver e50sn12051
========================

Supported chips:

  * Delta E50SN12051

    Prefix: 'e50sn12051'

    Addresses scanned: -

    Datasheet:

      Provided by Delta upon request and NDA

Description
-----------

E50SN12051 is a 600W non-isolated 1/8th brick DC-DC power module.

This driver supports the E50SN12051 PMBus compliant monitor device.

The device provides measurements for:

* Input voltage
* Output current
* Output voltage
* Temperature

The driver is based on the PMBus core and exposes standard hwmon
sysfs attributes.

Sysfs attributes
----------------

======================= =======================================================
curr1_label             "iout1"
curr1_crit              Critical maximum current.
                        From IOUT_OC_FAULT_LIMIT register.
curr1_crit_alarm        Current critical high alarm.
                        From IOUT_OC_FAULT status.
curr1_input             Measured current.
                        From READ_IOUT register.
curr1_max               Maximum current.
                        From IOUT_OC_WARN_LIMIT register.
curr1_max_alarm         Current high alarm.
                        From IOUT_OC_WARN_LIMIT status.

in1_label               "vin"
in1_alarm               Input voltage alarm.
in1_input               Measured voltage.
                        From READ_VIN register.

in2_label               "vout1"
in2_crit                Critical maximum voltage.
                        From VOUT_OV_FAULT_LIMIT register.
in2_crit_alarm          Voltage critical high alarm.
                        From VOLTAGE_OV_FAULT status.
in2_input               Measured voltage.
                        From READ_VOUT register.
in2_max                 Maximum voltage.
                        From VOUT_OV_WARN_LIMIT register.
in2_max_alarm           Voltage high alarm.
                        From VOLTAGE_OV_WARNING status.

temp1_crit              Critical high temperature.
                        From OT_FAULT_LIMIT register.
temp1_crit_alarm        Module temperature critical high alarm.
                        Set by comparing READ_TEMPERATURE_1 with OT_FAULT_LIMIT
                        if TEMP_OT_FAULT status is set.
temp1_input             Measured module's hot spot temperature.
                        From READ_TEMPERATURE_1 register.
temp1_max               Maximum temperature.
                        From OT_WARN_LIMIT register.
temp1_max_alarm         Module temperature high alarm.
                        Set by comparing READ_TEMPERATURE_1 with OT_WARN_LIMIT if
                        TEMP_OT_WARNING status is set.
======================= =======================================================

